{\rtf1\ansi\deff0
{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}}
{\f0\fs24
Distributed Systems: An Overview\par
\par
Distributed systems form the backbone of modern computing infrastructure, enabling applications to scale beyond the limits of any single machine. A distributed system is a collection of independent nodes that cooperate to present a unified service to end users. These nodes communicate over a network, which introduces latency, packet loss, and the possibility of partial failure. The fundamental difficulty of distributed systems was articulated by Leslie Lamport, who famously observed that a distributed system is one in which the failure of a computer you did not even know existed can render your own computer unusable.\par
\par
The theoretical foundation for understanding distributed systems rests on the CAP theorem, formulated by Eric Brewer in 2000 and later proved by Seth Gilbert and Nancy Lynch. The theorem states that any distributed data store can guarantee at most two of three properties: consistency, availability, and partition tolerance. Consistency means that every read receives the most recent write or an error. Availability means that every request receives a non-error response, though not necessarily the most recent data. Partition tolerance means the system continues to operate even when network partitions split the cluster into isolated subsets. Because network partitions are inevitable in any real distributed system, designers must choose whether to sacrifice consistency or availability during a partition event. Systems such as Apache Zookeeper and Google Chubby sacrifice availability to maintain strong consistency, while systems such as Amazon Dynamo and Apache Cassandra sacrifice consistency to maintain availability, instead offering eventual consistency guarantees.\par
\par
The practical implementation of a distributed system requires careful consideration of replication strategies, which determine how data is copied across nodes to ensure durability and availability. In a leader-based replication model, one node is designated the primary and handles all write operations, which are then propagated to follower replicas. Raft and Paxos are the two most widely deployed consensus algorithms for leader election and log replication, with Raft favoured in newer systems such as etcd and CockroachDB due to its emphasis on understandability over raw performance.\par
\par
Concurrency Models in Distributed Computing\par
\par
Concurrency is a defining characteristic of distributed systems: multiple nodes execute simultaneously, and their operations must be carefully coordinated to avoid anomalies. The classic anomalies include dirty reads, phantom reads, non-repeatable reads, and write skew. The ANSI SQL standard defines four isolation levels in ascending order of strictness, with serialisable isolation being the strongest guarantee: transactions behave as if they executed one at a time in some sequential order.\par
\par
The actor model, pioneered by Carl Hewitt in 1973 and popularised by the Erlang programming language, offers an alternative approach to concurrency that avoids shared mutable state entirely. In the actor model, the fundamental unit of computation is an actor: a lightweight stateful entity that processes messages from its mailbox one at a time. Actors communicate exclusively by passing immutable messages, and each actor's state is private and inaccessible to other actors. This eliminates the need for locks or shared memory synchronisation, making concurrent programs easier to reason about and test.\par
\par
Lock-free and wait-free algorithms represent the most demanding end of the concurrency spectrum. A lock-free algorithm guarantees that at least one thread makes progress in a finite number of steps, even if other threads are suspended. A wait-free algorithm, a stronger guarantee, ensures that every thread makes progress in a bounded number of steps regardless of the scheduling behaviour of other threads. The ABA problem is the canonical pitfall of lock-free programming: a compare-and-swap reads a value A, which is then changed to B and back to A by another thread, causing the CAS to succeed even though the state has changed in the interim.\par
\par
Fault Tolerance and Recovery\par
\par
Fault tolerance is the capacity of a system to continue operating correctly in the presence of failures. In distributed systems, failures are not exceptional events but a routine aspect of operation at scale. Netflix has operationalised this reality through its Chaos Engineering practice, deliberately injecting failures into production systems using tools such as Chaos Monkey and Chaos Gorilla to verify that the system degrades gracefully rather than catastrophically.\par
\par
The circuit breaker pattern, made famous by Michael Nygard in the book Release It, is one of the most widely adopted fault tolerance techniques in distributed systems. A circuit breaker wraps calls to an external service and monitors the rate of failures. When the failure rate exceeds a configured threshold, the circuit breaker transitions from the closed state to the open state and begins rejecting calls immediately without attempting to contact the failing service. This prevents the cascading failure scenario in which a slow or failed downstream service exhausts the thread pool of its caller.\par
\par
Bulkhead isolation, another pattern from Release It, takes its metaphor from the watertight compartments of a ship's hull: by isolating resources used to call different downstream services into separate thread pools or connection pools, the failure or slowness of one service cannot exhaust resources needed to call other services. Distributed tracing addresses the observability challenge specific to microservices architectures, where a single user-facing request may fan out across dozens of independent services. Distributed tracing systems such as Jaeger, Zipkin, and AWS X-Ray propagate a trace context consisting of a trace identifier and a span identifier in request headers as work flows between services.\par
}}
